Add training exercises (#131)
iterorganization/Waveform-Editor: docs/source/training/training.rst

In this training you will learn the following:

- How to use the Waveform Editor GUI and CLI
- How to create a Waveform Editor configuration
- How to create and edit different kinds of waveforms
- How to export configurations to an IDS

All examples assume you have an environment with the Waveform Editor up and running.
if you do not have this yet, please have a look at the :ref:`installation instructions <installing>`.
You only need to have installed the :ref:`dependencies for the Plasma Shape Editor <shape_editor_install>` 
if you want to do the exercises in the section :ref:`shape_editor_training`.

.. important::
   For this training you will need access to a graphical environment to visualize
   the simulation results. If you are on SDCC, it is recommended to follow this training
   through the NoMachine client, and to use **chrome** as your default browser (there have been
   issues when using firefox through NoMachine).

Creating your first waveforms
-----------------------------

In this section, you will learn how to create your first waveforms.

Exercise 1a: Creating a new waveform
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

>       In order to start editing waveforms, you must first learn how to navigate your way around

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      In order to start editing waveforms, you must first learn how to navigate your way
```

         can be found :ref:`here <edit_config>`.

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      You have now created a new waveform, which is shown in the sidebar:

      .. image:: ../images/training/ex1_sidebar.png
         :align: center

Exercise 1b: Creating a sine wave
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Now you will edit the empty waveform you created in the previous exercise. 
      Select the waveform in the sidebar and open the *Edit Waveforms* tab. You will 
      see an editor window as well as a live view the waveform currently being edited.

      The editor currently shows ``- {}``, indicating an empty tendency.
      A tendency can be specified by providing a tendency type and by setting parameters defining 
      the shape of this tendency. For example:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: <waveform type>, <param 1>: <value 1>, <param 2>: <value 2>, ...}

      Edit the waveform you created in the previous exercise such that it contains
      a single sine-wave tendency, with the following parameters:

      - Type: sine
      - Duration: from 10 to 15 seconds
      - Frequency: 0.5 Hz
      - Amplitude: 3

>       - Vertical range: 0 to 6

Reviewer: Explicitly providing start/end times is more of an advanced case, so I would rather just say that the duration is 5 seconds instead for the very first tendency that people type in.

`Vertical range` is not super clear, since you want users to use `base` and `amplitude`, perhaps the assignment can make this clearer?

      this waveform is allowed.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: sine, start: 10, duration: 5, frequency: 0.5, period: 2, min: 0, max: 6}

      If you set the the ``frequency: 2`` and ``period: 2``, for example:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: sine, start: 10, duration: 5, frequency: 2, period: 2, min: 0, max: 6}

      you will see an error pop up in the editor, notifying you that the period and 
      frequency do not match.

Advanced Waveforms
------------------

In this section, you will learn how to create more complex waveforms.

Exercise 2a: Creating a Plasma Current
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      In the previous exercises, you created a waveform that contained only a single tendency.
      However, waveforms can contain any number of tendencies, by adding additional lines 
      in the editor.

      We will now design a simple waveform representing the plasma current during
      a single pulse. Create a waveform called ``equilibrium/time_slice/global_quantities/ip``, 
      which has the following shape:
      

>       1. A linear ramp up from 0 to 1.5e7 A, in a duration of 100 seconds (use tendency type: ``linear``).

Reviewer: Nit-picking, but `15e6 A` would be much clearer to me: I can directly read that as 15 MA, while 1.5e7 needs more mental effort to find out it's actually 15 mega amp.

      .. hint::
         Detailed descriptions of the tendencies can be found :ref:`here <available-tendencies>`.

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      Your waveform can contain for example the following tendencies:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: piecewise, time: [0, 2, 3, 5, 6], value: [2.5, 3, 1, 3, 2]}
         - {type: linear, from: 2.5, rate: 0.25, duration: 3}

      You should see the following waveform:

      .. image:: ../images/training/complex.png
         :align: center

Exercise 3b: Smoothing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Continuing from the waveform in the previous exercise, modify it to include a 
      **smooth** tendency with a duration of 1 between the two tendencies. What do you notice?

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution
      
      Your waveform can contain for example the following tendencies:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: piecewise, time: [0, 2, 3, 5, 6], value: [2.5, 3, 1, 3, 2]}
         - {type: smooth, duration: 1}
         - {type: linear, from: 2.5, rate: 0.25, duration: 3}

      .. image:: ../images/training/smooth.png
         :align: center

>       You should see the following waveform. Notice how the smooth tendencies ensure 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You should see this waveform. Notice how the smooth tendencies ensure 
```

The image precedes the text, it doesn't follow it ;)

      tendencies that will be repeated.

      Copy the tendency list from the previous exercise use a ``repeat`` tendency to make it repeat three times.
      Ensure that the end of the linear tendency and the start of the piecewise tendency also smoothly 
      transition into each other, in 1 second.

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      A smooth tendency was added as a last tendency to smoothly transition from the 
      linear tendency back into the piecewise linear tendency. This whole waveform is 
      placed in the ``waveform`` parameter of the repeat tendency. Since the tendencies
      combine up to a total length of 11 (6+1+3+1), the total ``duration`` of the repeat
      tendency is set to 33, to obtain three full cycles.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - type: repeat
           duration: 33
           waveform:
           - {type: piecewise, time: [0, 2, 3, 5, 6], value: [2.5, 3, 1, 3, 2]}
           - {type: smooth, duration: 1}
           - {type: linear, from: 2.5, rate: 0.25, duration: 3}
           - {type: smooth, duration: 1}

      You should see the following waveform:

>       .. image:: ../images/training/repeat.png

Reviewer: As discussed yesterday, this looks pretty chaotic / noisy.

The smooth transition at the end of the repeated waveform still looks quite jagged (due to the relatively large mismatch in values)

      2. ``nbi/unit(1)/power_launched/data`` - derived from the energy using the above equation.

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      Create a new waveform called ``nbi/unit(1)/energy/data`` which contains:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         - {type: linear, to: 500e3, duration: 100}
         - {type: constant, duration: 500}
         - {type: linear, to: 0, duration: 100}

      Create a second waveform called ``nbi/unit(1)/power_launched/data``, which contains:

      .. code-block:: yaml

         16.5e6 * ("nbi/unit(1)/energy/data" / 870e3) ** 2.5

      You should have the following two waveforms:

      .. image:: ../images/training/derived_nbi.png
         :align: center

Exporting Waveforms
-------------------

In this exercise you will learn how to export waveform configurations.

.. warning:: In this section it is suggested to use ``imas print`` to quickly inspect
   the exported IDSs. To use this, it is required to have the 
   `imas-core <https://git.iter.org/projects/IMAS/repos/al-core/browse>`_ package 
   (locked behind ITER login wall) installed. 

>    If you do not have this installed, you can manually inspect the exported IDSs.

Reviewer: I don't understand this remark:

- You'll need imas-core both for the export and for the `imas print` when using the hdf5 (or mds+) backend
- You shouldn't need imas-core at all for the export and `imas-print` when exporting to an IMAS netCDF file?

Exercise 5a: Exporting from the UI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      In this exercise, we will continue with the configuration that you stored in 
      exercise 4a. If you forgot to save it, the YAML is also shown under the tab `Configuration`.
      Load this configuration into the Waveform Editor, if you are unsure how to, have a look 
      at the instructions :ref:`here <gui>`.

      We will export our EC beam power values to an ec_launchers IDS. Export the configuration

>       to a NetCDF file. Sample the time such that there are 20 points in the range from 0 to 800s.

Reviewer: I think users will need a bit more instructions how to export to a netCDF file

      Inspect the exported IDS using ``imas print <your URI> ec_launchers``, which 
      quantities are filled? Notice that the waveform in the configuration runs from 0 to 700s,
      while you export from 0 to 800s . What happens with the exported values outside 
      of the waveform (time steps later than 700 s)?

      .. hint::
         Detailed instructions on how to export the waveform configuration can be found :ref:`here <export_config>`.

   .. md-tab-item:: Configuration

      If you forgot to save the configuration of exercise 4a, copy the following YAML file,

>       and store it to disk.

Reviewer: And load it back into the waveform editor?

         ├── beam[6]
         │   └── beam[6]/power_launched
         │       └── data: array([    0.    , 21052.6316, 42105.2632, ...,     0.    ,     0.    ,     0.    ])
         ├── beam[7]
         │   └── beam[7]/power_launched
         │       └── data: array([    0.    , 21052.6316, 42105.2632, ...,     0.    ,     0.    ,     0.    ])
         ├── beam[8]
         │   └── beam[8]/power_launched
         │       └── data: array([    0.    , 21052.6316, 42105.2632, ...,     0.    ,     0.    ,     0.    ])
         ├── beam[9]
         │   └── beam[9]/power_launched
         │       └── data: array([    0.    , 21052.6316, 42105.2632, ...,     0.    ,     0.    ,     0.    ])
         └── time: array([  0.    ,  42.1053,  84.2105, ..., 715.7895, 757.8947, 800.    ])

Exercise 5b: Exporting different Data Dictionary versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Repeat the previous exercise, but this time, before exporting change the data dictionary 
      version to **3.42.0** in the `Edit Global Properties` tab, and save the configuration.

>       Ensure you enter a different from previous exercise. Again, print the IDS in your terminal, what has changed?

Reviewer: Not clear what you want to be different here: Different export netCDF file, different waveform name, different Data Dictionary version?

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      You should see that the data dictionary version of the IDS has changed to '3.42.0':

>       .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: This is just plain text, not bash, right?

         ec_launchers
         ├── ids_properties
         │   ├── homogeneous_time: 1
         │   └── ids_properties/version_put
         │       ├── data_dictionary: '3.42.0'
         │       ├── access_layer: '5.4.3'
         │       └── access_layer_language: 'imas 2.0.1'
         ...

Exercise 5c: Exporting from the CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      You can also export a configuration using the CLI. Try exporting your configuration
      using the same settings with the CLI command. Print the IDS afterwards, is it the 
      same as before?

      .. hint::

         Each CLI command has a help page which can be printed by supplying the ``--help``
         flag, for example:

         .. code-block:: bash

            waveform-editor --help 

         Detailed instructions on how to use the CLI can be found :ref:`here <cli>`.

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution

      Export the configuration using:

      .. code-block:: bash

>          waveform-editor export-ids <example YAML> <your URI> --linspace 0,800,20

Reviewer: Funny highlighting: everything is grey except the first 0 in 0,800,20 (which is red)

<img width="1134" height="153" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bbe56561-d475-4aab-85a6-91416b6119a2" />

      This exports the same IDS as in previous exercise.

.. _shape_editor_training:

Plasma Shape Editor
-------------------

In this section you will learn how to use the plasma shape editor. For this section 
it is required to have installed the :ref:`dependencies for the Plasma Shape Editor <shape_editor_install>`.
Detailed information about the plasma shape editor can be found in :ref:`the documentation <plasma_shape_editor>`.

> If you are on SDCC, ensure the following modules are loaded, which are required to run NICE.

Reviewer: Move the `module load` command directly below this, or move this sentence directly above the code block. Now it appears as if something is missing :)

Exercise 6a: Setting up NICE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The plasma shape editor is a graphical environment in which you can design a specific plasma shape
and use an equilibrium solver, such as NICE, to obtain the coil currents required to obtain
this plasma shape.

.. code-block:: bash

>    module load IMAS-Python SuiteSparse/7.7.0-intel-2023b libxml2 Blitz++ MUSCLE3

Reviewer: Isn't IMAS-Python already loaded when loading the waveform-editor module?

Author: True, but I was assuming that people would just pip install it, since we don't mention the module in the installation docs at all. If we do want people to use the module, we should ensure the module contains the latest version, and update the installation docs accordingly.

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Open the tab ``Plasma Shape Editor`` in the Waveform Editor GUI. 

>       You should see an empty plotting window on your left, and an options menu on your right.

Reviewer: I would look for a menu on a menubar. Perhaps better to call these *option panels* so it's clear they're not dropdown menus?

      NICE requires configuration to be set. 

      1. Set the executable paths for the NICE inverse and direct mode. These should point

>          to the executables you built in the :ref:`installation instructions <shape_editor_install>`.

Reviewer: Do we expect all attendees to build NICE themselves, or can we point to a build of NICE in someones public folder?

Author: We have planned this training to be after the general PDS training, in which they will already have build NICE themselves, which they can use. I have updated it so that is mentioned.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Besides the machine description URIs you provided in the previous exercise, NICE
      requires some extra input to run. We focus on the inverse mode of NICE for now.
      For this mode NICE requires the following:

      - A desired plasma shape
      - The plasma current
      - Characteristics of the vacuum toroidal field; R0 and B0
      - p' and ff' profiles

      First, open the ``Plasma Shape`` options menu, set it to ``parameterized``, and
      leave the shape settings on theirs defaults for now.

      Secondly, open the ``Plasma Properties`` options menu, and set it to the ``Manual`` option. 
      Leave the values at its default for now. This will set the plasma current, R0 and B0, and the ff' and p' profiles
      through :ref:`a parameterisation <abg_parameterisation>` using the alpha, beta, and gamma parameters. Leave the values
      at default for now.

      You should now have set up enough to run NICE inverse mode, which you can verify by
      checking that there are no more ⚠️ icons besides the option menus, and that the ``Run`` button is enabled.

>       What do you see in the plot on the left? What happens if you hover your mouse over the 

Reviewer: Before or after pressing the "Run" button? ;)

      options, you can change how many contour lines are plotted, as well as change which 
      plotting components are shown.

      For example: 

      .. image:: ../images/training/nice_result.png
         :align: center

Exercise 6c: Configurating the Plasma Shape
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      There are three ways to configure the desired plasma shape for NICE inverse in the Plasma Shape Editor.

      1. By providing an equilibrium IDS containing a `boundary outline <https://imas-data-dictionary.readthedocs.io/en/latest/generated/ids/equilibrium.html#equilibrium-time_slice-boundary-outline>`_.
      2. By providing a geometric parameterization.
      3. By providing gap distances for an equilibrium IDS containing `boundary gaps <https://imas-data-dictionary.readthedocs.io/en/latest/generated/ids/equilibrium.html#equilibrium-time_slice-boundary-gap>`_.
      
      We will try out the first two methods in this exercise.

      1. Select the ``Equilibrium IDS outline`` option. 
         Try to provide an outline from an equilibrium IDS, for example by using the URI below

>          if you are on SDCC. Try to visualize the boundary outline of the time steps at 200s and 251s, 

Reviewer: > Do or do not, there is no try.

Please review all places where you use `try`, it sounds a bit childish in a training (unless you want people to try something to figure out it's not possible for some reason)

      2. Select the ``Parameterized`` option, and try changing some of the 
         sliders to change the shape to your desired shape. Try running NICE in inverse mode, does it converge?

   .. md-tab-item:: Solution
      
      1. Running NICE inverse with time slice at 200s, converges and you should see the 
         following equilibrium:

         .. image:: ../images/training/shape_valid.png
            :align: center

         Running it with the time slice at 251s, NICE doesn't converge and it will throw
         an error:

         .. image:: ../images/training/shape_invalid.png
            :align: center
      2. If you provided a valid plasma shape NICE will converge and you will see the 
         resulting equilibrium, otherwise you will receive an error.

Exercise 6d: Fixing Coil Currents
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      By default, NICE is able to freely change all coil currents to achieve the desired
      plasma shape. It is possible, however, you fix any of the coils to a specific value,
      and NICE will try to achieve your desired plasma shape by varying the unfixed coil

>       currents. This is possible to do in the ``Coil Currents`` menu. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      currents. You can do this in the ``Coil Currents`` panel. 
```

      Load this configuration into the Waveform Editor, if you are unsure how to, have a look 
      at the instructions :ref:`here <gui>`.

>       We will export our EC beam power values to an ec_launchers IDS, and store it using a IMAS NetCDF file.

Reviewer: typo `a IMAS NetCDF file` -> `an IMAS NetCDF file`

In this section you will learn how to use the plasma shape editor. For this section 
it is required to have installed the :ref:`dependencies for the Plasma Shape Editor <shape_editor_install>`.

> If you already have already built NICE inverse before (for example, if you followed the PDS training), 

Reviewer: Typo `already have already`

you can use this instead.

Detailed information about the plasma shape editor can be found in :ref:`the documentation <plasma_shape_editor>`.
If you are on SDCC, ensure the following modules are loaded, which are required to run NICE.

.. code-block:: bash

   module load IMAS-Python SuiteSparse/7.7.0-intel-2023b libxml2 Blitz++ MUSCLE3

Exercise 6a: Setting up NICE
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The plasma shape editor is a graphical environment in which you can design a specific plasma shape
and use an equilibrium solver, such as NICE, to obtain the coil currents required to obtain
this plasma shape.

.. md-tab-set::
   .. md-tab-item:: Exercise

      Open the tab ``Plasma Shape Editor`` in the Waveform Editor GUI. 

>       You should see an empty plotting window on your left, and an options panels on your right.

Reviewer: Typo `an options panels` -> `an options panel`
